Unify installation instructions (#41)
crate/crate-tutorials: docs/install.rst

.. highlight:: bash

.. _install:

==================

> Quick installation

Author: Maybe just call it **Installation**?

   :local:
   :depth: 1

Preface
=======

This part of the documentation covers the installation of CrateDB on Linux,
macOS and Windows systems.
The first step to using any software package is getting it properly installed.
Please read this section carefully.

Introduction
============

By installing CrateDB the way as outlined in this document, you will be able to
quickly setup and run a single-node cluster.

After the installation is finished, the CrateDB service should be up and
running. Now, you can access the :ref:`Admin UI <admin-ui:index>` from your
local machine by navigating to::

    http://localhost:4200/

After successfully installing the software, you might want to follow up with
:ref:`taking the guided tour <use>`.

Also, you might enjoy to be guided into further information about how to
quickly adjust the :ref:`configuration settings <configure>`, read more
details about the :ref:`reference:config` of CrateDB, the background about
:ref:`howtos:bootstrap-checks`, multi-node configuration within the section
about :ref:`howtos:clustering` and :ref:`howtos:going-into-production`. When
operating a CrateDB cluster in production, `performance tuning`_ will also be

> of interest.

Reviewer: Maybe it's just me, but I find this flow a bit weird. We point users to several steps before getting to the installation aspect. Users then have to remember this and come back after the installed it, or they get distracted with configuration before the started with the installation.

I think moving this to the end as a follow up would lead to a better flow.

Reviewer 2: Thank you for your feedback. I did it like this on several occasions and had good experiences with it, but I will also be happy to put it at the end of the document. The main reason was that I didn't want to clutter each section for the individual installation target with such a paragraph.

.. _performance tuning: https://crate.io/docs/crate/howtos/en/latest/performance/

.. NOTE::

    To add additional CrateDB nodes to this kind of cluster in order to make it
    form a multi-node cluster, you will need to remove the cluster state after

>     changing the configuration.

Reviewer 2: Can you point out some details how to exactly do that?

Reviewer 2: Both https://github.com/crate/crate/issues/10058 and https://github.com/crate/crate-howtos/issues/174 might be related to this topic, right?

Author: correct 👍

Reviewer 2: Thank you. So, we might want to bring the quintessence of the content at [1] into a separate document here and link to this from the section referenced above?

[1] https://community.crate.io/t/3-node-cluster-not-forming-after-install-azure-ubuntu-vms/426/2

Reviewer: Similar here. I find this note here at this point a bit premature and distracting. I think we should move this further to the bottom - if at all

Reviewer: To elaborate a bit on my thoughts here: I think we've to be careful and avoid overloading a user with information that is not yet relevant for them. Mentioning a lot of things upfront gives the impression of things being complicated. If we gradually introduce the content as it becomes relevant the users are less intimidated.

Reviewer 2: Thank you for your clear statement. I had the same feeling while editing this document but didn't know about the background why this paragraph was meant to be placed here. I will be more than happy to improve it by moving all relevant admonitions of this kind to the end of the document.

.. NOTE::

    If you are interested to follow the development more closely, please check
    out the :ref:`reference:release_notes` for more specific information about
    each CrateDB release. `Other releases of CrateDB`_ are also available.

> 

Reviewer: Is this really relevant here?

Reviewer 2: I also don't believe so, it has been carried over from the other documents and I am questioning the reason as well. I will remove it.

Prerequisites
=============

CrateDB requires a `Java virtual machine`_ to run.

- Starting with CrateDB 4.2, a `Java virtual machine`_ is bundled with CrateDB
  and no extra installation is necessary.

> - CrateDB version 3.0 to 4.1 required a separate Java installation, version
>   11 was the minimum requirement. Earlier versions required Java 8.
>   We recommend using OpenJDK_ on Linux Systems and `Oracle Java`_ on
>   Microsoft Windows and macOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CrateDB versions before 4.2 required a separate Java installation. For CrateDB 3.0 to 4.1, Java 11 is the minimum requirement. CrateDB versions before 3.0 require Java 8.
  We recommend using OpenJDK_ on Linux Systems and `Oracle Java`_ on
  Microsoft Windows and macOS.
```

Otherwise the first part of the sentence implies that versions before 3.0 required no separate Java installation - that is than contradicted by the second sentence.

Basic setup
===========

This section of the documentation outlines how to use the release archives to
install CrateDB.

Automatic installation
----------------------

CrateDB has an effortless installer suitable for all `Unix-like`_ systems
running ``bash``::

    bash -c "$(curl -L https://try.crate.io/)"

> 

Reviewer: As @proddata already suggested, I think we should consider removing this variant altogether.

Manual installation
-------------------

This walkthrough is suitable to install and run CrateDB on both `Unix-like`_
systems as well as on Microsoft Windows.

#. Download the latest `CrateDB release archive`_. Please make sure to select
   the right release archive matching your system.

#. Once downloaded, extract the archive either using your favorite terminal or
   command line shell or by using a GUI tool like `7-Zip`_::

>        tar -xzf crate-*.tar.gz

Reviewer: For windows this will be a zip file. Maybe we should make that explicit?

#. On the terminal, change into the extracted ``crate`` directory::

       cd crate-*

#. Run a CrateDB single-node instance on the local network interface::

       ./bin/crate

#. In order to stop CrateDB again, use :kbd:`ctrl-c`.

.. SEEALSO::

      Consult the :ref:`reference:cli` documentation for further information
      about the ``./bin/crate`` command.

Notes about Microsoft Windows
-----------------------------

If you are installing CrateDB on a recent `Windows Server`_ edition, setting
up the latest *Microsoft Visual C++ 2019 Redistributable* package is required.
You can download it at `msvcrt x86-64`_, `msvcrt x86-32`_ or `msvcrt ARM64`_.

Within the terminal, as a Windows user, the prompt after `starting PowerShell`_
will look like this.

.. code-block:: doscon

    PS> ./bin/crate

Debian and Ubuntu
=================

This section of the documentation outlines how to install CrateDB deb_ packages
using the apt_ package manager.

> 

Reviewer: I think if we fold installation via package managers in the same documentation as the tarball installation we have to make it clear that this is an alternative way to install it. This should probably also be done at the start of the document - a sentence or something to point out that there are multiple ways to install it with links to the relevant sections.

I'm actually not sure if it is a good idea to merge this into the same document. I find it confusing to follow a documentation where you have sections which you need to skip as it's not always clear where you can continue. 

I think this ties into my earlier comments about the "follow up actions" that are already mentioned in the introduction.

Reviewer 2: > I think if we fold installation via package managers in the same documentation as the tarball installation we have to make it clear that this is an alternative way to install it. This should probably also be done at the start of the document - a sentence or something to point out that there are multiple ways to install it with links to the relevant sections.

I second that. However, I also support @proddata's idea that the package manager based installation should be advertised as the primary installation variant.

So, either
a) split it into different documents again.
b) put the tarball installation at the bottom and outline the difference within an introductory sentence outlining the different ways of installations, as you suggested.

Author: > I second that. However, I also support @proddata's idea that the package manager based installation should be advertised as the primary installation variant.

I think it makes a lot of things easier, especially upgrading to new versions.
I also think it is ok to have two separate instructions, just not 5

.. TIP::

    If this command aborts with an error, please consult the `Docker
    troubleshooting guide`_. You are also welcome learn more about
    :ref:`howtos:resource_constraints` with respect to running CrateDB within
    containers.

.. CAUTION::

    This type of invoking CrateDB will get you up and running quickly.

    Please note, by default, the CreateDB Docker container is ephemeral, so
    data will not be stored in a persistent manner. When stopping the
    container, all data will be lost.

    When you are ready to start using CrateDB for data you care about, please
    consult the :ref:`full guide to CrateDB and Docker <howtos:cratedb-docker>`
    in order to configure the Docker setup appropriately by using persistent
    disk volumes.

.. _configure:

Basic configuration
===================

In order to configure CrateDB, take note of the configuration file location and
the available environment variables.

Configuration files
-------------------

The main CrateDB configuration files are located within the ``/etc/crate``
directory.

Environment variables
---------------------

The CrateDB startup script uses :ref:`reference:conf-env` from the

> ``/etc/default/crate`` file. Here is an example::

Author: to be fair the path is only correct for the packaged versions (deb,yum)

env variables in general are valid either way

Reviewer 2: Thank you. I extended this sentence to also include the correct path for the "ad-hoc installation".
